Welcome back.
So in the last lesson we learned about composition and how that can compare with inheritance.
We also learned how we could use composition to get around one of the perceived limitations of Java,
which is the fact that Java does not support multiple inheritance.
And just a reminder multiple inheritance is where a class can extend from more than one other class.
So if we turn back to the CEO class, for example, here we see that the CEO extends employee, but
we cannot have it extend from additional classes by doing something like, you know, putting a comma
here and saying that it also extends from pilot or something like that.
You can't do that in Java.
However, in this lesson, we're going to learn some other ways to work around that fact.
So real quick, we'll just reiterate a little bit of what you learned in the last lessons.
I set up a scenario in the last lesson where I said, OK, we want the CEO to not only be a CEO, but
we also want him to be a pilot, right?
Maybe he likes the fly on the weekends or something like that.
So we created a pilot class and we just pretending like, Hey, we're modeling some aspects of a pilot,
right?
So we've got this pilot here, and the pilot has a couple of properties and then has various behaviors
such as, you know, he's able to fly and things of that sort.
All right.
And then we extracted an interface from the pilot.
And if you recall, all that does is it just went through and found all the methods on pilot and then
declared them in a new interface, which we called flyer.
So we'll jump into that.
So here are the methods that were on the class.
And the only reason we did this was so that we could make the CEO or any other class, for that matter,
appear to be a pilot, technically appear to be a flyer.
OK.
So we put that interface there.
And then in order to allow the CEO to have the same capabilities as a pilot, we used composition.
And all that really meant is that we created a new instance of a pilot.
We stored that instance in an instance variable or a field.
Now we started in an an instance variable of type flier rather than of type pilot.
It doesn't matter a ton, but typically we should favor storing instances in their interface type or
in the more generic type, if you can.
OK, because that allows for more flexibility later.
And then we generated delegate methods on this class from the methods on flyer.
OK.
And what that means is the IED inspected all of the methods of the pilot class, and then it offered
to create what I like to call pass through methods where it basically just duplicated the the signatures
of those methods.
And then it generated calls down to those corresponding methods on the flyer instance variable.
OK.
And so you can see that here.
And that's kind of a neat little trick if you want to call it that to be able to get around the lack
of multiple inheritance support within Java.
So if we had other classes with other capabilities that we wanted to endow on the CEO class or some
other classes, we could use this this capability of composition to get around the lack of multiple
inheritance, OK?
And so this works very well, and it is oftentimes recommended as the way to go if you need that kind
of capability.
So now I want to show you, though, that there is a newer technique that you could consider using to
get around the lack of traditional support for multiple inheritance in Java.
Though I want to caution you, you should tread very lightly if you consider using this.
And at the end of this lesson, I will go into a little bit of detail explaining the fact that what
I'm about to show you wasn't primarily intended for getting around multiple inheritance.
It was actually intended for something else.
And I will show you that at the end.
All right.
So let's jump in to the interface flyer here, and I will just remind you that an interface simply is
like a lightweight class where we can describe the behaviors that we want on a type.
And in this case, what I mean by type is a class, essentially, but we don't supply an implementation
for those methods.
And in fact, I'll just remind you that even if I were to delete this semicolon and put the curly braces
here.
Not allowed to even do this, right?
So you're not allowed to do that because that's not what interfaces originally were for.
However, as of Java version eight, which is quite some time ago, I think that's like 2014.
As of Java, eight interfaces have been expanded in what they can do.
And so now there is actually a way to supply an implementation with methods in interfaces.
And I'm going to show you that now and show you what the repercussions of this are.
So I cannot do this right.
However, let me put this back.
However, what I can do is this.
So let's let's let's pretend like we want to endow the programmer with a new set of skills.
Let's say that programmers are well known for enjoying cooking from time to time.
OK.
And so we want to endow our programmer with the ability to also cook so as before.
Let's create a new interface.
So I'm going to right click on the package, go to new Java class.
I will select interface and here I will say Chef.
OK, we'll call it chef and enter.
All right, so we've got this new chef interface.
Now, as before, we can start defining a number of methods on this interface.
However, we can supply actual implementation code with these methods and let me show you how so if
we preface our methods with a new special keyword, which is default.
We can then supply an implementation with a method, so let's say a chef can cook.
Right?
So let's put a method on here.
Let's make it void, and let's just make it a method called cook.
And and, you know, we can even make it take an input of a string, which may be like the food that
should be cooked, OK, and then we can supply the curly braces like any other method, and then we
can have it do something like print out.
I am now cooking.
Food.
All right.
So this will do exactly what it looks like it should do.
And it's perfectly allowed.
And let's throw one more default method on here.
Let's and let's have this one return a string just to mix it up a little bit.
Let's have this one be a method to clean up, and it will take nothing.
And let's see.
So this is expecting a string, so we'll just have it return.
I'm done cleaning up.
And just to show you that we can do this.
Let me also show you that we can still have our regular interface methods where we cannot specify any
implementation.
So let's say that a chef can also yell at people.
Right?
So let's declare another method that returns a string and we'll call this yell at people.
And so this one, we just put the semicolon on and just a quick reminder, so if I tried to put a body
here, it's not going to allow me to write.
It's not allowed.
And that's because I don't have the default keyword there.
All right.
So now if we jump over to the programmer class or any class for that matter, I can simply declare that
this method implements, not extends, but implements chef.
Like so now it's giving me an error right now because it's going to tell me that I need to implement
the one unimplemented method.
The Yell at people method, right?
So if I hover on this, that's what we'll see.
Yeah, I have to implement yell at people.
Now I don't want to actually implement that, but I could you know how to do that?
So I'm going to go back over here to the chef interface, and I'm just going to remove that method.
And we put that there just to prove that we can mix these default methods along with traditional interface
methods, which are generally referred to as abstract methods on the interface.
And then if I jump back over to the programmer now that read error message has gone away.
Now let's see something cool here.
If we jump over to the main class, what I'm going to do is I will create an instance of my programmer
now.
For this instance, I'm going to store it in a variable of type programmer for a very specific reason,
which I will point out in just a moment.
So I'm going to create an instance of a programmer, and I'll just call it coder, the shorter slang
term for programmer, write new programmer and it takes a string.
And I don't care about this string right now, so I'm just going to leave that empty there.
Now here's the part I want to show you those methods that are not directly defined on programmer but
are defined on the chef coder dot.
There's cleanup and there's Cook right there.
OK.
So I could call this cook method here.
Hamburger.
And there you go.
Now I'm not going to run this because it's going to blow up if I don't pass anything in there.
And you get it.
But the point here is that this method is completely inherited from the interface and it is actually
implemented.
So this will actually work.
We can actually implement something that's probably about 90 90 to 95 percent of multiple inheritance
if we really, really wanted to, because going back over here to the programmer class, I could have
other interfaces with default methods defined on them, and all their methods would just automatically
show up here under programmer.
OK.
So that is a way to get a certain amount of multiple inheritance.
Now, as with all things, there's going to be some caveats here, and there's at least one big caveat
here.
Let me show you what it is.
So if we jump into the chef interface, so with true multiple inheritance, you've got a class that
is extending another class, which is called a super class.
And that super class not only has behavior in the form of methods that can be inherited, it also can
have data in the form of instance variables or fields that can be inherited.
However, with interfaces, you don't get that.
So let me show you what I mean.
I can define a something like a field here, let's say will make a string and we'll call it favorite
food, and we can even initialize it to something like hamburger.
OK, so we've got this field here on the interface, and then we could introduce a method to get that
favorite food.
So it will make it a default string, get favorite food.
Return favorite food.
All right, so so far, so good that's that's looking fine, right?
But how about this?
How about a sweater?
Set favorite food.
Now, watch this.
Normally.
With a regular class to set this favorite food.
We just do this, this dot favorite food equals favorite food.
But look at this.
And then if we hover on this error, let's see what we get.
Cannot assign a value to final variable favorite food.
And therein lies the issue.
When we put a so-called field on an interface, that field is made final automatically by Java, and
because it's made final is the same as if we just had the final keyword right there.
In fact, I can put that word there.
But the ad presented in gray because it's redundant.
And if you'll recall, final means that once that value is set, you cannot change it.
And so it doesn't make any sense for us to have a setter method that allows us to change the value of
that because you wouldn't be permitted to change that value.
So I can absolutely set this field to a value as I'm doing here and when I declare an initialize it,
and this default method can even retrieve it, but I cannot change it.
So that's a pretty big limitation on my ability to do full on multiple inheritance because this interface
with default methods will never be able to hold any state.
It will never be able to remember any any data that we're setting on it.
And that's, you know, that's that's that's a major aspect of object orientation and classes.
Nevertheless, if you can identify some behaviors that you would like to make shareable in this fashion,
this is certainly a technique that you could consider using.
Now, another interesting technique that you can utilize as well is that not only can you put default
methods on an interface here, let me let me, let me just get rid of that.
You can also put static methods on an interface, which is potentially kind of cool.
So we could do something like static.
I don't know.
And convert units.
And you know, you get to have some utility methods that convert different cooking units or something
like that ounces to grams or, you know, something something of that sort.
Right?
And that sort of utility method is almost always made as a static method.
And so such a such a method could make a lot of sense to put on a chef interface or something like that.
And that could be quite useful.
All right.
So now let me take a moment to explain the original use case for the use of default methods on interfaces.
So the original issue that caused the developers of Java to implement this functionality in the first
place was the fact that they came up with a lot of new functionality for a number of Java's native classes,
which we will be learning about.
And these were pre-existing classes, all of which implemented various interfaces.
And so if they were going to add a lot more methods to these classes, those methods generally needed
to be added to the interfaces.
And here's the problem whenever you add a regular abstract method that is a regular method to an interface,
a typical method to an interface, all classes that implement that interface are forced to implement
those methods as well.
And for one particular set of classes in Java, which are called collections, which we will learn about
soon, there are many classes that are part of Java and some that are made by third parties that extend
what those collection classes can do by implementing the standard collections interfaces.
And so if the developers of Java had chosen to simply go in and add in all of these additional methods
to the standard collections interfaces, for example, it would have caused a lot of trouble for all
of the existing libraries that were implementing those collections interfaces.
And it was decided that that would be too much turmoil overnight for too many projects.
So what they did was to come up with the idea of default methods.
Basically, they could add these additional methods to the interfaces, but they could provide a default
implementation for them.
And by having a default implementation on the interface, pre-existing classes that were already implementing
those interfaces would not be forced to also implement the additional methods because there's already
an implementation on the interface itself, which are the default methods.
However, if those implementing classes chose to come up with their own implementations for those methods,
they could do that.
So you kind of get the best of both worlds.
So having said this, some of the astute ones of you might even have noticed if we can now provide default
methods on interfaces.
What's the difference between putting a default method on an interface and putting regular methods with
full implementations on abstract classes?
Because abstract classes let you do pretty much the same thing and you'd be right to ask that question?
They are extremely similar, but I've already pretty much pointed out what the differences and abstract
class is a class.
It's just one that can't be instantiated on its own.
Other than that, it is a regular class.
It can maintain state i.e. you can put instance variables or fields on abstract classes, whereas with
interfaces not so much, the fields are automatically made final and therefore not all that useful,
especially if you want to set some state on an interface field.
So having said all of this, here are my thoughts.
This is a very cool technology, but I would very much warn against going out of your way to utilize
this technique to implement multiple inheritance.
I'm not saying don't ever do it.
Here's what I would suggest.
Play with it.
Play with it on your own personal projects and on small projects that won't have a lot of impact on
lots of people.
OK.
Play with it as much as you want to on your own small personal projects.
I'd be a lot more careful, though, about trying to utilize this functionality, especially for multiple
inheritance on commercial projects for companies where you've got lots of developers working in that
same code base.
This is really intended for what we call APIs or application programming interfaces.
When the developers of Java defined the collections classes, they created those interfaces.
For those classes, that's really an API.
OK, so these are teams that are making frameworks, if you will, that lots of people are meant to
use and sometimes even meant to extend this functionality is really intended for people who are making
such frameworks in APIs not so much intended for end user developers.
Who are just writing in house code that they completely own on their own.
If you own all of the code on your own, then you can design your code in such a way that either you
won't need multiple inheritance because you can just build the functionality that you need right into
the classes where you need them in the first place.
Or you can always use composition, as I've already shown in the previous lesson.
But because we are in a module where we're learning about interfaces, I thought I should go ahead and
mention this capability and show you how it works.
But that's about all I have to say about this topic for now, and I will see you in the next one.